README.md, before:

[![hacs_badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/HACS-Default-orange.svg)](https://github.com/custom-components/hacs)

# ETA Integration for Home Assistant

Integration of ETA (Heating) sensors and switches to Home Assistant

This integration uses the [ETA REST API](https://www.meineta.at/javax.faces.resource/downloads/ETA-RESTful-v1.2.pdf.xhtml?ln=default&v=0) to get sensor values and set switch states from the ETA pellets heating unit.

This is a fork of [nigl's repo](https://github.com/nigl/homeassistant_eta_integration) with the following changes:

-   Friendly sensor names
-   Shows the current values for all sensors during configuration
    -   This makes it way easier to select the relevant sensors
-   Implemented Switches
-   Implemented Text Sensors (state of some endpoints, e.g. `Bereit` (`Ready`) or `Heizen` (`Heating`) for the boiler)
-   Implemented error sensors:
    -   A binary sensor, which activates if the ETA terminal reports at least one error
    -   A sensor, which shows the number of active errors
    -   A sensor, which shows the latest active error message
-   Implemented error events ([details](#error-events))
-   Implemented a custom service to set the value of an endpoint ([details](#set-value-service))
-   Implemented writable sensors ([details](#writable-sensors))
-   Implemented time sensors (only for API v1.2 or higher)

## Screenshots

|            Sensors             |             Controls             |              Diagnostic              |
| :----------------------------: | :------------------------------: | :----------------------------------: |
| ![Sensors](images/sensors.png) | ![Controls](images/controls.png) | ![Diagnostic](images/diagnostic.png) |

## Installation

This integration can be configured directly in Home Assistant via HACS:

1. Go to `HACS` -> `Integrations` -> Click on the three dots in the top right corner --> Click on `Userdefined repositories`
1. Insert `https://github.com/Tidone/homeassistant_eta_integration` into the field `Repository`
1. Choose `Integration` in the dropdown field `Category`.
1. Click on the `Add` button.
1. Then search for the new added `ETA` integration, click on it and the click on the button `Download` on the bottom right corner
1. Restart Home Assistant when it says to.
1. In Home Assistant, go to `Configuration` -> `Integrations` -> Click `+ Add Integration`
   Search for `Eta Sensors` and follow the instructions.
    - **Note**: After entering the host and port the integration will query information about every possible endpoint. This step can take a very long time, so please have some patience.
      - As a rough reference: on newer ETA units with around `800` discovered entities, the initial setup can take around `8-15 minutes`.
    - **Note**: This only affects the configuration step when adding the integration. After the integration has been configured, only the selected entities will be queried.
    - **Note**: The integration will also query the current sensor values of all endpoints when clicking on `Configure`. This will also take a bit of time, but not as much as when adding the integration for the first time.

## General Notes

-   You have to activate the webservices API on your pellet heater first: see the "official" [documentation](https://www.meineta.at/javax.faces.resource/downloads/ETA-RESTful-v1.2.pdf.xhtml?ln=default&v=0):

    -   Log in to `meinETA`
    -   Go to `Settings` in the middle of the page (not the bottom one!)
    -   Click on `Activate Webservices`
    -   Follow the instructions

-   For best results, your pellet heater has to support at least API version **1.2**. If you are on an older version the integration will fall back to a compatibility mode, which means that some sensors may not be correctly detected/identified. The ones that are correctly detected and identified should still work without problems.\
    Writable sensors may not work correctly in this mode (they may set the wrong value), because version 1.1 lacks the necessary functions to query details about sensors.\
    If you want to update the firmware of your pellet heater you can find the firmware files on `meinETA` (`Settings at the bottom` -> `Installation & Software`).

-   Your ETA pellets unit needs a static IP address! Either configure the IP adress directly on the ETA terminal, or set the DHCP server on your router to give the ETA unit a static lease.

- If your pellets unit is behind a proxy (`nginx`, `Cloudflare`, etc.) you may have to increase the timeout of the proxy when adding or configuring the integration.
    - The integration can take a very long time (> 5 minutes) when enumerating the list of available sensors. A proxy server may interrupt the connection between the browser and the HA server because it thinks the HA server is down because it takes too long to send the requested data.
    - Check the manual of your proxy server for how to increase the timeouts.
        - For nginx you may have to set the options `proxy_connect_timeout`, `proxy_send_timeout`, `proxy_read_timeout` and `send_timeout` to a higher number (600 seconds).

## Updating the List of Sensors

If the sensors on the ETA unit are changed, the integration can be updated to reflect that. This is useful for example if new sensors are added, which should be shown in HA.

To do that follow these steps:
1. Go to `Settings` -> `Devices & services` -> `ETA Sensors`
1. Click on the gear symbol (`Configure`)
1. In the popup dialog you can choose between different options to update the list of sensors:
    - The first option, `Update sensor values`, will only update the current values of all sensors in the list. It will not update the list of sensors itself.
      - This option is disabled by default.
      - If you only want to change the parallel request limit, keep this option disabled.
    - The second option, `Update list of sensors`, will update the whole list of sensors.
    - The third option, `Maximum parallel API requests`, controls how many API requests are sent in parallel.
      - Higher values can speed up updates, but increase load on the ETA unit and may cause errors/timeouts on older or slower devices.
      - Lower values are safer for older ETA units.
      - Practical starting points:
        - Older ETA units: `3-5`
        - Newer ETA units: `8-15` (if stable)
      - If you see API errors/timeouts, reduce this value step by step.
      - The value is selected via dropdown (`1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 15`).
1. New sensors will then be added to the list, where you can select them in the next step.
1. Deleted or renamed sensors will be handled differently depending on if the sensor has previously been added to HA:
    - If the sensor has not been added to HA, it will simply be removed from the list. If it has been renamed on the ETA terminal, it will show its new name instead.
    - If the sensor has previously been added to HA, its entity will remain in HA, but it will be orphaned. HA will show a warning that the integration does not provide this entity any more.\
    **If the sensor has been renamed in the ETA terminal, its new name will show up in the list instead, but the integration will not link the new name to the old entity!** You have to find the new name in the list of available sensors and add it again. If you want to keep the history of the entitiy you have to manually rename the new entity to its old name. If you do this the integration will orphan this entity again the next time the list of sensors is updated in the options, because it can't keep track if the user renames the entities.

## Logs

If you have problems setting up this integration you can enable verbose logs on the dialog where you enter your ETA credentials.
This will log all communication responses, which may help locating the problem.
After setting up the integration you can download the logs at `Settings` -> `System` -> `Logs` -> `Download Full Log`.
Please note that these logs may be very large, and contain sensitive information from other integrations. If you want to post them somewhere you may have to manually edit the file and delete the lines from before you started setting up this integration.

## Error Events

This integration publishes an event whenever a new error is reported by the ETA terminal, or when an active error is cleared.
These events can then be handled in automations.

### Event Info

If a new error is reported, an `eta_webservices_error_detected` event is published.\
If an error is cleared, an `eta_webservices_error_cleared` event is published.

Every event has the following data:
| Name | Info | Sample Data |
|------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `msg` | Short error message | Water pressure too low 0,00 bar |
| `priority` | Error priority | Error |
| `time` | Time of the error, as reported by the ETA terminal | 2011-06-29T12:48:12 |
| `text` | Detailed error message | Top up heating water! If this warning occurs more than once a year, please contact plumber. |
| `fub` | Functional Block of the error | Kessel |
| `host` | Address of the ETA terminal connection | 0.0.0.0 |
| `port` | Port of the ETA terminal connection | 8080 |

### Checking Event Info

If you want to check the data of an active event, you can follow these steps.

**Note**: This is only possible if the ETA terminal actually reports an ective error!

1. Open Home Assistant in two tabs
1. On the first tab go to `Settings` -> `Devices & Services` -> `Devices` on top -> `ETA`
1. On the second tab go to `Developer tools` -> `Events` on top -> Enter `eta_webservices_error_detected` in the field `Event to subscribe to` -> Click on `Start Listening`
1. On the first tab click on the `Resend Error Events` button
1. On the second tab you can now see the detailed event info

### Sending a Test Event

If you want to send a test event to check if your automations work you can follow these steps:

1. Go to `Developer tools` -> `Events` on top
1. Enter `eta_webservices_error_detected` in the field `Event type`
1. Enter your test payload in the `Event data` field
    - ```
      msg: Test
      priority: Error
      time: "2023-11-06T12:48:12"
      text: This is a test error.
      fub: Kessel
      host: 0.0.0.0
      port: 8080
      ```
1. Click on `Fire Event`
1. Your automation should have been triggered

## Writable Sensors

This implementation supports setting the value of sensors which have a unit of `°C`, `kg`, or `%`.

These writable sensors are not immediately added to the dashboard in Home Assistant. You can find the sensors (after adding them via configuration) on the ETA device page under `Config`.

### Migration

You can add writable sensors by clicking on `Configure` on the ETA Integeration page in Home Assistant.
If you are clicking this button for the first time after updating this integration from a previous version without support for these sensor types, this step will take a while because the integration will have to query the list of valid sensors from the ETA unit again.

### Caveats on APi v1.1

API v1.1 does not have some endpoints, which are used to query the valid values of writable sensors.
If your terminal is on this API version, the integration will fall back to a compatibility mode and guess the valid value ranges for these sensors.

Also, on API v1.1 it is not possible to query if a sensor is writable at all! This integration therefore shows all sensors in the list of writable sensors, and the user has to choose the ones which are actually writable.

### Legal Notes

The authors cannot be made responsible if the user renders their ETA heating unit unusable because they set a sensor to an invalid value.

## Custom Services

THis integration provides some custom services. More information can be found on the [wiki](https://github.com/Tidone/homeassistant_eta_integration/wiki/Custom-Services).

## Integrating the ETA Unit into the Energy Dashboard

You can add the ETA Heating Unit into the Energy Dashboard by converting the total pellets consumption into kWh, and adding that as a gas heater.

To convert the consumption you have to add a custom template sensor to your `configuration.yaml` file:

```
# Convert pellet consumption (kg) to energy consumption (kWh)
template:
  - sensor:
    - name: eta_total_energy
      unit_of_measurement: kWh
      device_class: energy
      state_class: total_increasing
      state: >
        {% if states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') | float(default=none) is not none %}
          {{ states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') | float(default=0.0) | multiply(4.8) | round(1) }}
        {% else %}
          {{ states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') }}
        {% endif %}
```

Make sure to replace the `&lt;IP> field with the IP address of your ETA unit. You can also check the sensor id by going to the options of the sensor, and searching for it in the entities.

You can also use the web interface to create a template helper:
![template helper](images/template_sensor.png)

You can then add your ETA heating unit to your Energy Dashboard by adding this new sensor to the list of gas sources.

## Future Development

If you have some ideas about expansions to this implementation, please open an issue and I may look into it.

## Tests

You can run the unit tests by executing `python3 -m pytest tests/ -v` in the root directory of the project.\
Make sure to install the requirements before: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`.

Commit message:

chore(repo): prepare project metadata and maintainer workflows
Update repository links for the new meinETA-ha project and keep Tidone as codeowner.\n\n- add GitHub issue templates, PR template, CODEOWNERS and Dependabot\n- add HACS, hassfest and pytest GitHub Actions workflows\n- add CONTRIBUTING.md and improve README project guidance\n- add local brand assets for Home Assistant/HACS\n- ignore macOS and local virtualenv artifacts

README.md, after:

[![hacs_badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/HACS-Custom-orange.svg)](https://hacs.xyz)

# ETA Integration for Home Assistant

Integration of ETA (Heating) sensors and switches to Home Assistant

This integration uses the [ETA REST API](https://www.meineta.at/javax.faces.resource/downloads/ETA-RESTful-v1.2.pdf.xhtml?ln=default&v=0) to get sensor values and set switch states from the ETA pellets heating unit.

This repository continues the ETA Home Assistant integration originally based on [nigl's repo](https://github.com/nigl/homeassistant_eta_integration), with additional improvements from later community work and ongoing maintenance in this repository.

-   Friendly sensor names
-   Shows the current values for all sensors during configuration
    -   This makes it way easier to select the relevant sensors
-   Implemented Switches
-   Implemented Text Sensors (state of some endpoints, e.g. `Bereit` (`Ready`) or `Heizen` (`Heating`) for the boiler)
-   Implemented error sensors:
    -   A binary sensor, which activates if the ETA terminal reports at least one error
    -   A sensor, which shows the number of active errors
    -   A sensor, which shows the latest active error message
-   Implemented error events ([details](#error-events))
-   Implemented a custom service to set the value of an endpoint ([details](#set-value-service))
-   Implemented writable sensors ([details](#writable-sensors))
-   Implemented time sensors (only for API v1.2 or higher)

## Screenshots

|            Sensors             |             Controls             |              Diagnostic              |
| :----------------------------: | :------------------------------: | :----------------------------------: |
| ![Sensors](images/sensors.png) | ![Controls](images/controls.png) | ![Diagnostic](images/diagnostic.png) |

## Installation

This integration can be configured directly in Home Assistant via HACS:

1. Go to `HACS` -> `Integrations` -> Click on the three dots in the top right corner --> Click on `Userdefined repositories`
1. Insert `https://github.com/christofpichler/meinETA-ha` into the field `Repository`
1. Choose `Integration` in the dropdown field `Category`.
1. Click on the `Add` button.
1. Then search for the new added `ETA` integration, click on it and the click on the button `Download` on the bottom right corner
1. Restart Home Assistant when it says to.
1. In Home Assistant, go to `Configuration` -> `Integrations` -> Click `+ Add Integration`
   Search for `Eta Sensors` and follow the instructions.
    - **Note**: After entering the host and port the integration will query information about every possible endpoint. This step can take a very long time, so please have some patience.
      - As a rough reference: on newer ETA units with around `800` discovered entities, the initial setup can take around `8-15 minutes`.
    - **Note**: This only affects the configuration step when adding the integration. After the integration has been configured, only the selected entities will be queried.
    - **Note**: The integration will also query the current sensor values of all endpoints when clicking on `Configure`. This will also take a bit of time, but not as much as when adding the integration for the first time.

## General Notes

-   You have to activate the webservices API on your pellet heater first: see the "official" [documentation](https://www.meineta.at/javax.faces.resource/downloads/ETA-RESTful-v1.2.pdf.xhtml?ln=default&v=0):

    -   Log in to `meinETA`
    -   Go to `Settings` in the middle of the page (not the bottom one!)
    -   Click on `Activate Webservices`
    -   Follow the instructions

-   For best results, your pellet heater has to support at least API version **1.2**. If you are on an older version the integration will fall back to a compatibility mode, which means that some sensors may not be correctly detected/identified. The ones that are correctly detected and identified should still work without problems.\
    Writable sensors may not work correctly in this mode (they may set the wrong value), because version 1.1 lacks the necessary functions to query details about sensors.\
    If you want to update the firmware of your pellet heater you can find the firmware files on `meinETA` (`Settings at the bottom` -> `Installation & Software`).

-   Your ETA pellets unit needs a static IP address! Either configure the IP adress directly on the ETA terminal, or set the DHCP server on your router to give the ETA unit a static lease.

- If your pellets unit is behind a proxy (`nginx`, `Cloudflare`, etc.) you may have to increase the timeout of the proxy when adding or configuring the integration.
    - The integration can take a very long time (> 5 minutes) when enumerating the list of available sensors. A proxy server may interrupt the connection between the browser and the HA server because it thinks the HA server is down because it takes too long to send the requested data.
    - Check the manual of your proxy server for how to increase the timeouts.
        - For nginx you may have to set the options `proxy_connect_timeout`, `proxy_send_timeout`, `proxy_read_timeout` and `send_timeout` to a higher number (600 seconds).

## Updating the List of Sensors

If the sensors on the ETA unit are changed, the integration can be updated to reflect that. This is useful for example if new sensors are added, which should be shown in HA.

To do that follow these steps:
1. Go to `Settings` -> `Devices & services` -> `ETA Sensors`
1. Click on the gear symbol (`Configure`)
1. In the popup dialog you can choose between different options to update the list of sensors:
    - The first option, `Update sensor values`, will only update the current values of all sensors in the list. It will not update the list of sensors itself.
      - This option is disabled by default.
      - If you only want to change the parallel request limit, keep this option disabled.
    - The second option, `Update list of sensors`, will update the whole list of sensors.
    - The third option, `Maximum parallel API requests`, controls how many API requests are sent in parallel.
      - Higher values can speed up updates, but increase load on the ETA unit and may cause errors/timeouts on older or slower devices.
      - Lower values are safer for older ETA units.
      - Practical starting points:
        - Older ETA units: `3-5`
        - Newer ETA units: `8-15` (if stable)
      - If you see API errors/timeouts, reduce this value step by step.
      - The value is selected via dropdown (`1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 10, 15`).
1. New sensors will then be added to the list, where you can select them in the next step.
1. Deleted or renamed sensors will be handled differently depending on if the sensor has previously been added to HA:
    - If the sensor has not been added to HA, it will simply be removed from the list. If it has been renamed on the ETA terminal, it will show its new name instead.
    - If the sensor has previously been added to HA, its entity will remain in HA, but it will be orphaned. HA will show a warning that the integration does not provide this entity any more.\
    **If the sensor has been renamed in the ETA terminal, its new name will show up in the list instead, but the integration will not link the new name to the old entity!** You have to find the new name in the list of available sensors and add it again. If you want to keep the history of the entitiy you have to manually rename the new entity to its old name. If you do this the integration will orphan this entity again the next time the list of sensors is updated in the options, because it can't keep track if the user renames the entities.

## Logs

If you have problems setting up this integration you can enable verbose logs on the dialog where you enter your ETA credentials.
This will log all communication responses, which may help locating the problem.
After setting up the integration you can download the logs at `Settings` -> `System` -> `Logs` -> `Download Full Log`.
Please note that these logs may be very large, and contain sensitive information from other integrations. If you want to post them somewhere you may have to manually edit the file and delete the lines from before you started setting up this integration.

## Error Events

This integration publishes an event whenever a new error is reported by the ETA terminal, or when an active error is cleared.
These events can then be handled in automations.

### Event Info

If a new error is reported, an `eta_webservices_error_detected` event is published.\
If an error is cleared, an `eta_webservices_error_cleared` event is published.

Every event has the following data:
| Name | Info | Sample Data |
|------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `msg` | Short error message | Water pressure too low 0,00 bar |
| `priority` | Error priority | Error |
| `time` | Time of the error, as reported by the ETA terminal | 2011-06-29T12:48:12 |
| `text` | Detailed error message | Top up heating water! If this warning occurs more than once a year, please contact plumber. |
| `fub` | Functional Block of the error | Kessel |
| `host` | Address of the ETA terminal connection | 0.0.0.0 |
| `port` | Port of the ETA terminal connection | 8080 |

### Checking Event Info

If you want to check the data of an active event, you can follow these steps.

**Note**: This is only possible if the ETA terminal actually reports an ective error!

1. Open Home Assistant in two tabs
1. On the first tab go to `Settings` -> `Devices & Services` -> `Devices` on top -> `ETA`
1. On the second tab go to `Developer tools` -> `Events` on top -> Enter `eta_webservices_error_detected` in the field `Event to subscribe to` -> Click on `Start Listening`
1. On the first tab click on the `Resend Error Events` button
1. On the second tab you can now see the detailed event info

### Sending a Test Event

If you want to send a test event to check if your automations work you can follow these steps:

1. Go to `Developer tools` -> `Events` on top
1. Enter `eta_webservices_error_detected` in the field `Event type`
1. Enter your test payload in the `Event data` field
    - ```
      msg: Test
      priority: Error
      time: "2023-11-06T12:48:12"
      text: This is a test error.
      fub: Kessel
      host: 0.0.0.0
      port: 8080
      ```
1. Click on `Fire Event`
1. Your automation should have been triggered

## Writable Sensors

This implementation supports setting the value of sensors which have a unit of `°C`, `kg`, or `%`.

These writable sensors are not immediately added to the dashboard in Home Assistant. You can find the sensors (after adding them via configuration) on the ETA device page under `Config`.

### Migration

You can add writable sensors by clicking on `Configure` on the ETA Integeration page in Home Assistant.
If you are clicking this button for the first time after updating this integration from a previous version without support for these sensor types, this step will take a while because the integration will have to query the list of valid sensors from the ETA unit again.

### Caveats on APi v1.1

API v1.1 does not have some endpoints, which are used to query the valid values of writable sensors.
If your terminal is on this API version, the integration will fall back to a compatibility mode and guess the valid value ranges for these sensors.

Also, on API v1.1 it is not possible to query if a sensor is writable at all! This integration therefore shows all sensors in the list of writable sensors, and the user has to choose the ones which are actually writable.

### Legal Notes

The authors cannot be made responsible if the user renders their ETA heating unit unusable because they set a sensor to an invalid value.

## Custom Services

THis integration provides some custom services. More information can be found on the [wiki](https://github.com/christofpichler/meinETA-ha/wiki/Custom-Services).

## Integrating the ETA Unit into the Energy Dashboard

You can add the ETA Heating Unit into the Energy Dashboard by converting the total pellets consumption into kWh, and adding that as a gas heater.

To convert the consumption you have to add a custom template sensor to your `configuration.yaml` file:

```
# Convert pellet consumption (kg) to energy consumption (kWh)
template:
  - sensor:
    - name: eta_total_energy
      unit_of_measurement: kWh
      device_class: energy
      state_class: total_increasing
      state: >
        {% if states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') | float(default=none) is not none %}
          {{ states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') | float(default=0.0) | multiply(4.8) | round(1) }}
        {% else %}
          {{ states('sensor.eta_<IP>_kessel_zahlerstande_gesamtverbrauch') }}
        {% endif %}
```

Make sure to replace the `&lt;IP> field with the IP address of your ETA unit. You can also check the sensor id by going to the options of the sensor, and searching for it in the entities.

You can also use the web interface to create a template helper:
![template helper](images/template_sensor.png)

You can then add your ETA heating unit to your Energy Dashboard by adding this new sensor to the list of gas sources.

## Future Development

If you have ideas for improvements, please open an issue in this repository and include enough technical detail to reproduce the problem or evaluate the proposal.

## Tests

You can run the unit tests by executing `python3 -m pytest tests/ -v` in the root directory of the project.\
Make sure to install the requirements before: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`.

## Contributing

Bug reports, feature requests, and pull requests are welcome. For local development and contribution guidelines, see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).
